---
title: "Using Strongly Typed Models in Umbraco 8"
date: "2020-06-17"
description: "How to use Strongly Typed Models in Umbraco 8"
---

Using strongly typed models in Umbraco is an excellent way to prevent silly bugs and improve the quality of your codebase. I spent about a year working with Umbraco without strongly typed models before I realised what I was missing out on. If this sounds like you, this article could be beneficial to you. My aim is to quickly summarise how to setup Umbraco to enable strongly typed models in your project.
<br/>
<br/>

Let's compare two different approaches to displaying some Umbraco data on a page. We'll use a blog as an example. Our View file for a blog article might look like this when we are not using strongly typed models:

```csharp

<div>
    <h1>@Model.Value("title")</h1>
    <small>@Model.Value("date")</small>
    <p>@Model.Value("text")</p>
<div>

```

<br/>
<br/>
 
Pretty standard stuff here. We've got a blog page that is displaying some properties from Umbraco - those properties have the alias of `title`, `date`, and `text`.
<br/>
<br/>
 
Here is how we can do it with strongly typed models:

```csharp

<div>
    <h1>@Model.Title</h1>
    <small>@Model.Date</small>
    <p>@Model.Text</p>
<div>

```

<br/>
<br/>
 
With strongly typed models, we can access the properties directly on the Model without having to go via the Value method. We get IntelliSense auto-completion as well so we will avoid making any typos. Overall it's just a much cleaner and safer way to write your code. So now you're asking how we can get this. We have to take a trip to our web.config file and update some values.
<br/>
<br/>
 
We're going to add/change the following values:

```csharp
<appSettings>
    // other values removed for brevity
    <add key="Umbraco.ModelsBuilder.Enable" value="true" />
    <add key="Umbraco.ModelsBuilder.ModelsMode" value="AppData" />
    <add key="Umbraco.ModelsBuilder.ModelsDirectory" value="~/../MyProject.Core/UmbracoModels" />
    <add key="Umbraco.ModelsBuilder.ModelsNamespace" value="MyProject.Core.UmbracoModels" />
    <add key="Umbraco.ModelsBuilder.AcceptUnsafeModelsDirectory" value="true" />
</appSettings>
```

<br/>
<br/>

We've enabled Models Builder and changed the ModelsMode to AppData. We've then specified a location for the generated models to be placed, and we've confirmed that this location can be outwith the Umbraco Web project. I like to keep my back-end code in a Core project within the solution rather than in the Web project.
<br/>
<br/>

With these settings in place, Umbraco will now create Classes for all of the DocumentTypes that we create in Umbraco. These Classes will have a filename such as `MyDocumentTypeName.generated.cs`. They will be stored in a folder called `UmbracoModels` as this is what we specified in the web.config settings.
<br/>
<br/>

There is one final step required to get Umbraco to generate these Classes. You need to open up the Umbraco back-office and navigate to the Settings page. Here you should see a tab called Models Builder. Within this section, you will see a button called Generate Models. Click this button. You'll need to do this every time you update a DocumentType or create a new DocumentType. This will cause Umbraco to generate the Classes and keep them in sync with your DocumentTypes.
<br/>
<br/>

Now we need to make sure that our view file is using the generated Class as it's model for the page. To do this, we update the using statement which is at the top of your View file. It will probably look something similar to this to begin with:

```csharp
@inherits Umbraco.Web.Mvc.UmbracoViewPage
```

<br/>
<br/>
 
We want to change it to this:

```csharp
@inherits Umbraco.Web.Mvc.UmbracoViewPage<ContentModels.BlogArticle>
@using ContentModels = MyProject.Core.UmbracoModels;

```

<br/>
<br/>
 
In this example, we have got a DocumentType called BlogArticle for which a class has been generated by the Models Builder. That class sits within the `MyProject/Core/UmbracoModels` folder.
<br/>
<br/>
 
That's it. No longer do you need to call `@Model.Value("aliasName")`. The advantages of working with Umbraco in this way go much further than this - these models that have been generated can also be used for backend code if you are working with controllers and such.
